Now we're going to talk about
external hardware and devices.
I know what you're thinking, well,
we have been already dealing with external
hardware and devices, and yeah, that's
true, but we have been dealing with,
let's say, standard interfaces,
standard protocols.
But also,
we have a way to be even more low level,
such as connecting to Bluetooth.
Web Bluetooth is one of the APIs that,
the first API actually that
will let us communicate with
a lot of hardware out there.
Safari and
Firefox are not implementing the API.
It feels like they will never do that.
I mean, no one knows, but
there was a big discussion.
And I was part of the discussion,
by the way, on social media with
the Apple teams and the Chrome teams,
I was in the middle, actually.
And Apple said that they're not
going to implement this because they
feel it's a big security risk,
and blah, blah, blah, blah.
The Chrome's team says that that's not
the case, that is just imagination,
blah, blah, blah.
Anyway, we have Web Bluetooth
only on Chromium-based browsers.
And not even on all of them, Brave, for
example, took that part off of Chromium.
So if you're using Brave,
you won't have Web Bluetooth.
Well, Web Bluetooth will, of course, let
you communicate with Bluetooth devices.
But not every Bluetooth devices,
only BLE, that's Bluetooth Low Energy.
It's kind of the modern Bluetooth world.
I'm not sure if you remember Bluetooth
devices 10 years ago, 15 years ago.
I'm not sure if you remember
that you have a handshaking,
where you have to handshake one
device with the other one with code.
Well, that was not Bluetooth Low Energy.
And that Bluetooth can have more distance,
low energy is only ten meters.
But anyway, most of the modern small
devices are Bluetooth Low Energy.
I mean, my Apple Watch is low energy.
So you can scan for devices.
You can scan the services
available on those devices.
And here comes the part where
it will get really tricky.
Web Bluetooth, Bluetooth in general,
not just Web Bluetooth, Bluetooth,
its complicated,
the protocol is really complicated.
So each device can expose services.
The service has an ID.
There are some IDs that
are kind of standard, such as,
I have a service of battery level.
So you can ask me about my battery,
how is my battery?
So that's a standard.
Another standard service can be,
for example, headphones.
Another one, heart measurements for
a heart sensor.
So there are a couple.
But for the rest, it's like any hardware
manufacturer can create its own ID.
So what's the ID that you need to use
to communicate with one particular
Bluetooth device?
You need to find a manual,
you need to find a tool that will
let you scan that device, or
there are tools that will help you
inspect a communication, like a proxy,
sniffing into the Bluetooth
communication to see what's going on.
And there are a lot of people in
the community that are already doing
that with a lot of well-known devices.
For example, let me show you,
there is a BB-8 drone,
have you seen that one, by Sphero?
And if you say BB-8 drone,
for example, Web Bluetooth,
Web Bluetooth, or
even not Web Bluetooth, NPM.
You will find projects
that already did the dirty
job of analyzing the messages that you
have to send to one particular thing.
And then you can take it from there, okay?
Yeah, of course,
you need the hardware, but
it's difficult to understand,
and you will see an example
now that I have here with me
how complicated it can become.
Okay, so
I'm not saying don't use Web Bluetooth,
I'm saying that it's hard world, okay?
It's not so simple as other web APIs,
because Bluetooth is complicated,
and it's not just services.
So we have devices,
each device is exposing services,
it can expose more than one service.
Then you can connect to those services, so
there is a connection
process known as GATT.
So you connect to the services, and
the complexity doesn't end there.
Each service can send and
receive data through something
known as a characteristic.
So each service has
different characteristics.
Each characteristic,
we have also a different ID.
So then you connect to
a service on a device, and
then you can write data or
read data to and
from a characteristic that you also
need to know the ID beforehand.
Some devices can expose the list of
services, so I have this, this, and that.
Some devices will have hidden services.
So if you don't know the ID,
you can't connect to it.
It gets complicated.
It's interesting but complicated.
It's a very low-level API.
So if you wanna connect to this little
guy here through Web Bluetooth, you can.
But it's much better to use the gamepad
API, even the WebHID API, okay?
By the way,
you cannot connect to some services.
There are some services on the web
that are restricted, for example,
FTP, or for example, there is FTP
over Bluetooth exists to send and
receive files, and audio.
So you cannot connect
to a Bluetooth speaker,
microphone, or headphone, you cannot.
I mean, the user can connect that to
the OS, and then the website can use that
as an external speaker or microphone, but
you cannot talk low level to that service.
So we need to also manipulate
in JavaScript binary data.
So we need to understand how to
create Uint arrays in JavaScript,
how to manipulate bits and create
that kind of data, if you like that.
And we need to understand
the devices communication protocol,
as I mentioned before.
This is how it looks like.
So first, we request access to a device,
so this is this part.
For example,
I can request devices without no filter.
If I do that, I will see a list of
all the Bluetooth devices around me.
Okay, or you can say, well,
I really wanted a device with that name,
or I want a device that
is exposing this service.
Instead of showing me all
the Bluetooth devices out there,
I can just see all the ones with
the heart rate service, only those.
By the way, you cannot get the list as
a developer, you don't get the list.
So I'm saying request device with
a filter, the user will see a UI,
a dialog, the user will pick the device.
For security reasons or
for privacy reasons,
your web app cannot scan
the Bluetooth around you.
Makes sense?
So we cannot receive the list by default,
by default, atleast.
We request the device and
then the user will pick one.
When we have this device,
we create a server that is a connection to
that device, and
we get the service with the ID.
The ID can be a string or
it can be a big number, a large number.
Then when we get the service, we get
the characteristic of that service, and
then we can receive data with
a characteristicvaluechanged event,
or we can write data to
the characteristic, okay?
It gets complicated.